[Lens] Page for Line charts (#4047)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/visualize/charts/line-charts.md

You can create line charts in {{kib}} using [**Lens**](../lens.md).

![Example Lens line chart](../../images/kibana-line.png)

## Build a line chart

To build a line chart:

::::::{stepper}

:::::{step} Access Lens
**Lens** is {{kib}}'s main visualization editor. You can access it:
- From a dashboard: On the **Dashboards** page, open or create the dashboard where you want to add a line chart, then add a new visualization.
- From the **Visualize library** page by creating a new visualization.
:::::

:::::{step} Set the visualization to Line
New visualizations default to **Bar**.

Using the visualization type dropdown, select **Line**.
:::::

:::::{step} Define the data to show
1. Select the {{data-source}} that contains your data.
2. Drag a time field to the **Horizontal axis** and a numeric field to the **Vertical axis**. {{kib}} automatically selects an appropriate aggregation function compatible with the selected field.

Optionally:
   - Add more numeric fields to create additional series, or drag a categorical field to **Break down by** to split the series.

>    - Add a [reference line](../lens.md#add-reference-lines) to mark targets or SLOs.

Reviewer: Should we cadd here that we can add **layers** or maybe elsewhere? The only place that layers are mentioned are in `Advanced line scenarios >
Compare current versus previous period with time shift`. Maybe we can add a link to how to work with layers

:::::

:::::{step} Customize the chart to follow best practices
You can tweak the appearance of your chart by adjusting axes, legends, and series styles from the chart settings. Consider the following best practices:

**Use color wisely**
:   Assign colors that match your users' expectations and consider your specific context.

**Provide context**

> :   Add descriptive axis titles or remove them for obvious axes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:   Add a legend and descriptive axis titles, or remove them for obvious axes.
```

For layout, hierarchy, and color guidance on dashboards, check the EUI’s [Dashboard good practices](https://eui.elastic.co/docs/dataviz/dashboard-good-practices/). 
For more chart configuration options, go to the [Line chart settings](#settings) section.
:::::

:::::{step} Save the chart
- If you accessed Lens from a dashboard, select **Save and return** to save the visualization and add it to that dashboard, or select **Save to library** to add the visualization to the Visualize library.
- If you accessed Lens from the Visualize library, select **Save**. The Save menu also lets you add the visualization to a dashboard and the Visualize library.
:::::

::::::

## Advanced line scenarios

### Compare current versus previous period with time shift [line-previous-period]

In line charts, you can enable time shift to compare the current value with a prior time range and identify deltas.

![Example Lens line chart current previous](../../images/kibana-line-current-previous.png)

1. Create a line chart with a time-based **Horizontal axis** and your main metric on **Vertical axis**, for example: `bytes`.

> 2. From the three-dot menu in the upper-left of the layer panel, select **Duplicate layer**.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Duplicate the layer:
    * {applies_to}`serverless: ga` {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.3` Select {icon}`copy` **Duplicate layer** from the visualization's main settings panel.
    * {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0-9.2` Open the {icon}`boxes_vertical` contextual menu of the visualization's main settings panel and select {icon}`copy` **Duplicate layer**.
```
Noticed this is changing, we can specify it this way

3. From the duplicated layer, open the **Advanced** of the **Vertical axis** and set **Time shift** to `1w`.

>    Check also [Compare differences over time](../lens.md#compare-data-with-time-offsets) for more details.

Reviewer: I think this can be a little bit confusing. What is "the Advanced". Maybe we should specify where you can find this...  I know is explained in the Compare differences over time link, so maybe we can put if before?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. From the duplicated layer settings, select the field defined as vertical axis to open its details. Expand its **Advanced** options and set **Time shift** to `1w` or to the time value of your choice.
   Check [Compare differences over time](../lens.md#compare-data-with-time-offsets) for more details.
```

> 4. Use a different color and set **Stacking** to **None** so areas overlay rather than stack.

Reviewer: ⚠️ There is no Stacking setting for line charts

Reviewer 2: We should also mention that series color isn't available when the **Breakdown** option is defined for the chart, as it's the color mapping of that option that is then taken into account

> 5. Update the legend to show “Current” and “Previous”.

Reviewer: I think this is not clear, you don't change the legend directly, you change the name of the  Vertical metric, and this change is reflected on the legend

::::{tip}

> You can also compute the relative change using a formula, for example:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also compute the relative change by defining the axis data with a [formula](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md#lens-formulas), for example:  
```
We may also move this entire note inside of step 3 to avoid having to provide to much context in this note

`(average(bytes) - average(bytes, shift='1w')) / average(bytes, shift='1w')`

> :::: 

Reviewer 2: We may want to call this out at the start - I don't see this as something critical as the goal is more to show how to do it with any data

> :::: 

Author: I wouldn't be too specific with the type of sample data. It might change, and it's difficult to maintain over time.

### Highlight thresholds with reference lines [line-reference-lines]

Use reference lines to indicate important thresholds, such as SLOs or alert limits.

![Example Lens line chart reference lines](../../images/kibana-line-reference-lines.png)

1. In the chart settings, add a static value reference line to mark your target or threshold visually.

> 2. Give it a label (for example, `Target` or `SLO`), choose a color, and optionally a band.

Reviewer: In here we can say text decoration or somtheing similar, since in the settings we don't use the world "label"

<img width="847" height="154" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bde63112-bc8a-4775-b5a2-ff445694c4d6" />

:   **Rank by**: Choose which metric determines the order of your data.
:   **Rank direction**: Sort values from highest to lowest.

**Appearance**
:   **Name**: By default, the chart uses the function or formula as title. It's a best practice to customize this with a meaningful title.

### Vertical axis settings [vertical-axis-settings]

**Data**
:   To represent the metrics or values you want to visualize, you can use quick functions like `Average`, `Count`, `Percentile`, `Counter rate`, or create custom calculations with formulas. Refer to [](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md#lens-formulas) for examples, or to the {icon}`documentation` **Formula reference** available from Lens.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/line-vertical-axis-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
   - **Name**: Customize the legend label with a descriptive name.
   - **Value format**: Control how numeric values are displayed on the vertical axis of your visualization.
   - **Series color**: Select a palette or specific color per series.
   - **Axis side**: Control where axis labels and tick marks appear.

> ### Breakdown settings [breakdown-settings]

Reviewer 2: the various settings available are missing here

The Breakdown bucket lets you compare trends across different categories within the same visualization.

### General layout [appearance-options]
When creating or editing a visualization, open the {icon}`brush` panel to adjust:

> - **Title and subtitle**: Add context like “Last 24 hours”.

Reviewer: I think this refers to the axis titles, left and bottom

- **Axes**: Set titles, units, scale (linear/log/percentage), and grid lines.

> - **Legend**: Position and truncation.

Author: Adjusted the text to explain what the legend is used for.

- If you accessed Lens from the Visualize library, select **Save**. The Save menu also lets you add the visualization to a dashboard and the Visualize library.
:::::

::::::

## Advanced line scenarios

### Compare with a previous period [line-previous-period]
Compare the current value with a prior time range using time shift to quickly see deltas.

1. Create a line series for the current value, for example: `average(response_time)`.
2. Add a second series with a time shift, for example: `average(response_time, shift='1w')`.
3. Use the legend labels to clarify “Current” versus “Previous (1w)”.

| Single series | With previous period |
|---|---|
| ![Metric over time](../../images/kibana-lens_lineChartMetricOverTime_8.4.0.png "title =70%") | ![Multiple series with previous period](../../images/kibana-lens_lineChartMultipleDataSeries_7.16.png "title =70%") |

::::{tip}
You can also compute the relative change as a separate series using a formula, for example:  
`(average(response_time) - average(response_time, shift='1w')) / average(response_time, shift='1w')`

> :::: 

Reviewer: I think this scenario makes sense! But I have some questions:
 
- Which data set are we using for the examples? The Kibana Sample Data Logs?
  - In that case, we can use the `bytes` field 
- For the scenario, do we want to use the formula, or do we want to add field and then go to "Advanced options" and select "time shift"?
  - I think in this scenario, the formula is used 
- I think we can only add one image, for example: 

<img width="1637" height="930" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6063d005-b6ff-47e5-9082-d9eea4827dc3" />

```suggestion
### Compare with a previous period
Compare the current value with a prior time range using time shift to highlight trends and changes over time.

1. Create a line series for the current value, for example: `average(bytes)`.
2. Add a second series with a time shift, for example: `average(bytes, shift='1w')`.
3. Use the legend labels to clarify “Current” versus “Previous (1w)”.

::::{tip}
You can also compute the relative change as a separate series using a formula, for example:  
`(average(bytes) - average(bytes, shift='1w')) / average(bytes, shift='1w')`
:::: 
```

Author: Adjusted the steps and captured a new screenshot.

### Highlight thresholds with reference lines [line-reference-lines]
Use reference lines to indicate SLOs or alert thresholds.

1. In the chart settings, add a **Reference line** (for example, `200` ms or `0.95`).
2. Give it a label (for example, `Target` or `SLO`), choose a color, and optionally a band.

> ![Reference line](../../images/kibana-lens_referenceLine_7.16.png "title =70%")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Highlight thresholds with reference lines [line-reference-lines]
Use reference lines to indicate important thresholds, such as SLOs or alert limits.

1. Add a static value reference line (e.g., 200 ms or 0.95) to visually mark your target or threshold.
2. Give it a label (for example, `Target` or `SLO`), pick a color, and optionally add a band for emphasis.

```

For the reference line static value, if we still use the bytes fields (in this case median of bytes) I think we must increase the example value to somthing like 6000, so the image example can look like this:

<img width="1634" height="927" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6112da93-1d44-481a-bd41-80a9e8d77459" />

Author: Adjusted the steps and captured a new screenshot.

---
navigation_title: Line charts
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
description: Instructions and best practices for building line charts with Kibana Lens in Elastic.
---

# Build line charts with {{kib}}

Line charts are ideal for visualizing how metrics evolve over time, spotting seasonal patterns, and detecting spikes or regressions at a glance. Use them for KPIs like response time, error rate, throughput, or utilization, and compare multiple series or previous periods on the same chart.

> You can create line charts from any numeric data using aggregations (for example, `Average`, `Percentile`, `Counter rate`) or with custom [formulas](../lens.md#lens-formulas). Line charts usually show time on the x-axis, but they can also display data grouped by numbers or categories.

Reviewer 3: >Line charts usually show time on the x-axis, but they can also display data grouped by numbers or categories.

In general is not great to have categories on the X axis of a line chart. The only "acceptable" categories are the ones that represent a continuous or sequential progression like month of a year, or quarters (usually always related to time).

If the connection between categories is not meaningful like "small," "medium," and "large", is incorrect to suggest a continuous, linear relationship and a steady rate of change between them.

Also if the spacing between categories is not equal or relevant can be misleading.

For layout, hierarchy, and color guidance on dashboards, check the EUI’s [Dashboard good practices](https://eui.elastic.co/docs/dataviz/dashboard-good-practices/). 
For more chart configuration options, go to the [Line chart settings](#settings) section.
:::::

:::::{step} Save the chart
- If you accessed Lens from a dashboard, select **Save and return** to save the visualization and add it to that dashboard, or select **Save to library** to add the visualization to the Visualize library.
- If you accessed Lens from the Visualize library, select **Save**. The Save menu lets you also add the visualization to a dashboard and to the Visualize library.
:::::

::::::

## Advanced line scenarios

### Compare with a previous period [line-previous-period]
Compare the current value with a prior time range using time shift to quickly see deltas.

1. Create a line series for the current value, for example: `average(response_time)`.
2. Add a second series with a time shift, for example: `average(response_time, shift='1w')`.
3. Use the legend labels to clarify “Current” versus “Previous (1w)”.

| Single series | With previous period |
|---|---|

> | ![Metric over time](../../images/kibana-lens_lineChartMetricOverTime_8.4.0.png "title =70%") | ![Multiple series with previous period](../../images/kibana-lens_lineChartMultipleDataSeries_7.16.png "title =70%") |

Reviewer 3: replace with better image

::::{tip}
You can also compute the relative change as a separate series using a formula, for example:  
`(average(response_time) - average(response_time, shift='1w')) / average(response_time, shift='1w')`
:::: 

### Smooth noisy series with moving average [line-moving-average]
Noisy metrics (for example, per-minute throughput) can be smoothed:

1. Add a series such as `sum(bytes)`.
2. Add a second series using `moving_average(sum(bytes), window=5)`.
3. Keep both series visible (raw versus smoothed) or show only the smoothed one.

### Highlight thresholds with reference lines [line-reference-lines]
Use reference lines to indicate SLOs or alert thresholds.

1. In the chart settings, add a **Reference line** (for example, `200` ms or `0.95`).
2. Give it a label (for example, `Target` or `SLO`), choose a color, and optionally a band.

> ![Reference line](../../images/kibana-lens_referenceLine_7.16.png "title =70%")

Reviewer 3: replace with better image

Author: Maria is helping to rework this scenario with meaningful data.
